docs: migrate 'adding snap configuration' (#5410)
canonical/snapcraft: docs/explanation/snap-configurations.rst

.. _explanation-snap-configurations:

Snap configurations
===================

Snaps can provide `configurable options
<https://snapcraft.io/docs/configuration-in-snaps>`_ so that the user can change
behavior at runtime.

Implementation in a snap
------------------------

The standard setup is split across four scripts:

- A **wrapper script** calls the app with the necessary environment variables
- A **management script** sets values, checks their validity, and restarts the app
- An optional **default-configure hook script** calls the management functions on first
  install before services are started
- A **configure hook script** calls the management functions on installation and changes

> In a typical setup, configuration options are mapped to environment variables within the
> snap's runtime. The environment variables are typically ones already established in the
> one or more of the apps' namespaces. When a variable changes because the user sets an
> option, the app picks up the change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a typical setup, configuration options are mapped to environment variables during the
snap's runtime. The environment variables are typically already established in
one or more of the apps' namespaces. When a variable changes because the user sets an
option, the app picks up the change.
```

Author: I kept the "within" because runtimes are more spatial than temporal: 4296532

Every time the user changes the configuration, the configure hook script executes.
Through functions in the management script, this hook will typically validate the
configuration and, for example, update environment variables or write to the necessary
configuration files.

Interpreting options
--------------------

Internally, snaps view and change their configuration using `snapctl

> <https://snapcraft.io/docs/using-the-snapctl-tool>`_ and its ``get``, ``set``, and

Reviewer: This link produces a 404.

Author: 4296532

``unset`` arguments.

The snapctl command works anywhere within the snap context, during execution of your
apps and services, and in all the snap's hooks.

Configuration options are not defined when a snap is created because any valid option
name is accepted. Instead, any set values need to be interpreted and converted into an
action by the snap developer.

> A snap developer is free to implement this process however they prefer, however it's
> most commonly accomplished with a purpose built script or function for each option, as
> defined by a snap's project file and its associated scripts and `hooks
> <https://snapcraft.io/docs/supported-snap-hooks>`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A snap developer is free to implement this process however they prefer, but it's
most commonly accomplished with a purpose-built script or function for each option, as
defined by a snap's project file and its associated scripts and `hooks
<https://snapcraft.io/docs/supported-snap-hooks>`_.
```

> When a hook alters the configuration, if the hook exits with a non-zero status code the
> changes won't apply. This is because the hook context is transactional -- either every
> change is applied, or none are.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a hook alters the configuration and exits with a non-zero status code, the
changes won't apply. This is because the hook context is transactional -- either every
change is applied, or none are.
```

Author: 4296532

Permitted values should then be documented in the snap description so that users know
which values are supported.

Default values
--------------

The snap daemon has no concept of *default values* for configuration options. Actions

> for these values need to be implemented by the snap developer using the `configure hook

Author: Whoops. 4296532

When a user resets a configuration option with ``snap unset``, or installs a snap, the
configure hook is run and the snap developer can therefore use this hook to check when
these values are unset and, if so, use ``snapctl set`` to restore that option to its
default value.

Setting these values explicitly is preferred over using implicit defaults in the snap,
because this way, users can easily discover which configuration options your snap
supports.

On Ubuntu Core, a device's `gadget snap <https://snapcraft.io/docs/the-gadget-snap>`_
can share default configuration options with the snaps listed in its ``gadget.yaml``
file. These options are shared when a snap is first installed using either the
`default-configure hook
<https://snapcraft.io/docs/supported-snap-hooks#heading--default-configure>`_, which is
run before services are started, or with the `configure hook
<https://snapcraft.io/docs/supported-snap-hooks#heading--the-configure-hook>`_, which
runs after services are started.

Nested values
-------------

You can group configuration options using a dotted path:

.. code-block:: bash

    snapctl set my-snap server.protocol=tcp server.port=4242

> Each configuration option can be retrieved by using the same dotted path, or you can
> retrieve the entire collection as a json document by specifying their common key:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each configuration option can be retrieved by using the same dotted path, or you can
retrieve the entire collection as a JSON document by specifying their common key:
```

Author: 4296532
